d20 Disputes With a Neighboring State 
1 Raiders are taking refuge in their lands 2 Ownership of a resource site is disputed 3 A usurper or criminal is being sheltered there 4 A troublemaking religion is based there 5 Their rulers have a political claim on the throne 6 A diplomatic marriage is going sour 7 A past war’s savagery has left deep scars 8 Their culture is supplanting local beliefs 9 Their immigrants are gaining great influence 10 They broke off an alliance or important pact 11 They lured away an academy or great temple 12 Border tariffs and taxes are blocking trade 13 They drove a terrible beast into this land 14 A Working of theirs caused problems here 15 They woke up a great peril from the past 16 They’re cooperating with an enemy group 17 They’re suspected of backing assassinations 18 A spy ring is suspected or has been found 19 They refused to give aid for some current need 20 They’ve been hostile to an allied group
---
d20 Positive Ties With a Neighboring State 
1 The ruling classes are related in some way 2 An important faith crosses the border 3 They fought by our side sometime in the past 4 Their culture is widely admired here 5 They helped to overcome an eldritch peril 6 They held back an enemy from our border 7 They are co-ethnics of the same origins 8 They provide critical trade relations 9 Sages and scholars came from there 10 They gave critical aid during a disaster 11 A hero of this land came originally from there 12 A past hero-king once ruled both lands 13 They produce some vital commodity 14 They have a shared enemy 15 A Working they have is helpful here, too 16 A long-standing alliance or trade pact exists 17 They recently conceded some disputed land 18 They greatly admire elements of this culture 19 They’re considered unusually attractive here 20 They took in refugees from here at one poin
---
d20 Current National Problems
1 Farmland is becoming worn-out and depleted 2 Verminous monsters are swarming 3 A rebel front is stirring up trouble 4 An outside power is backing internal strife 5 The leadership is inept and distracted 6 A religious reformer is breaking old compacts 7 An evil is provoking outraged rioting 8 Dark cults are attracting the ambitious 9 A Blighted horde is threatening the borders 10 An ancient ruin has disgorged some peril 11 Malcontents have obtained a potent artifact 12 Luxuriance has left the nation’s coffers bare 13 Local aristocrats are pushing for independence 14 An important mine has run out or been harmed 15 A sinister favorite has infatuated the leader 16 A recurring plant plague is causing hunger 17 Fearsome monsters are migrating into the land 18 A rival is preparing for war or raiding 19 A grand national plan is exhausting the people 20 A savage grudge has erupted between lords
---
d20 Good Things Happening Right Now
1 A splendid mine or resource has been found 2 A pious saint is strengthening a major faith 3 A noble heir shows signs of heroic greatness 4 A major rival has recently suffered a calamity 5 New farmland has been opened up recently 6 A new trade route has been forged 7 A horrible monster was slain or driven off 8 Good harvests have enriched the people 9 A wicked minister has been deposed 10 A new academy has recently opened 11 A bandit or rebel uprising has been crushed 12 Two rival lords have started to make peace 13 An old enemy has agreed to a peace pact 14 The military won a recent smashing victory 15 A helpful Working has been activated 16 A powerful artifact is helping the ruler 17 An old source of unrest has been calmed 18 A dark cult has been revealed and purged 19 New diplomatic ties have been made 20 A new lord has risen, loved by his people
---
d20 Thematic Element
1 Barbarism, with brutal savagery 2 Decadence, of sins and fadings 3 Despair, with good things unlooked-for 4 Exhaustion, with strength spent and lost 5 Ignorance, of terrors and the unknown 6 Oppression, with rule a crushing weight 7 Poverty, where even the rich are poor 8 Precarity, with all goods made fleeting 9 Stratification, where classes do not touch 10 Violence, where life is something cheap 11 Enlightenment, where knowledge is loved 12 Expansion, where things swell greater 13 Hope, that the future should be better 14 Justice, where a reckoning is had 15 Legitimacy, where rulers are by right 16 Pageantry, of splendor and magnificence 17 Prosperity, with wealth easily had 18 Renewal, with things growing brighter 19 Triumph, with victory a fresh memory 20 Unity, where purposes are shared
Barbarism: The nation is brutally assailed by bestial, primitive forces, whether from external enemies or internal divisions. Naked violence, cruelty, ig- norance, and hatred are always near the surface of things, either as threats pressing on the familiar or as instincts and habits among the natives. Decadence: The nation is voluptuously cruel, indulgent, and indifferent to the prices it pays for its pleasures. Unspeakable debaucheries and sordid delights are in common circulation, and few ever think to ques- tion the appropriateness of inflicting brutal evils in order to obtain some elevated enjoyment or refined pleasure. The PCs are regularly exposed to the con- sequences of such indulgences and the damage they inflict on others. Despair: The nation is redolent of hopelessness and ap- athetic submission to fate. It may be because some overwhelming evil seems inevitably due to pass, or because all prior efforts at improvement have brought only worse suffering, or because some bright cultural hope or golden age is now clearly lost and ruined forever. The nation will tend to accept evils and sufferings as inevitable, and the natives will do little to rebel, resist, or defy their unhappy fates. Enlightenment: A genuine love of knowledge imbues the nation, such that academies and schools have an important role in social and political life and a good education is considered a hallmark of gentil- ity. The populace has a genuine curiosity and zest for investigation, and finding the truth of things is considered more important than secure stability. Exhaustion: The nation is depleted of something critical, whether that is a tangible resource or their spiritu- al reserves of enthusiasm and hope. Everything is tired in this nation, with spent rivers, barren fields, cut-over forests, and shorn hillsides. If material re- sources are sufficient, the natives simply don’t have the energy or enthusiasm to bring in more than they presently do, perhaps out of a sense that nothing good can come of any putative improvement. Expansion: The nation’s borders are expanding, either through successful conquest, peaceful assimilation of bordermarches, or the seductive appeal of their values and culture. The society is vigorous and con- fident, assured of the justification of their expansion and of the good it will provide to everyone deserving of good. There’s usually some truth to this, albeit perhaps less than the expansionists would like to admit. Hope: The nation is imbued with a sense of hope and potential, the promise of a better day to come and a brighter future for those who win through their present problems. There may have been a recent discovery of some great trove of resources, some magical or technological innovation that promises great results, or the rise of a beloved house of seem- ingly-blessed rulers. Ignorance: The nation is an ignorant one, redolent of (incorrect) superstition, false gods, blundering in- stitutions, and erroneous beliefs of all kinds. These beliefs are somehow critical to the setting’s culture or society, such that being rid of them would cause some profound, potentially bloody disruption of life. Life in this nation can go on as it does only so long as the ignorance remains unilluminated, and the vast majority of its populace would rather remain in error than exist in chaos. d20 Thematic Element 1 Barbarism, with brutal savagery 2 Decadence, of sins and fadings 3 Despair, with good things unlooked-for 4 Exhaustion, with strength spent and lost 5 Ignorance, of terrors and the unknown 6 Oppression, with rule a crushing weight 7 Poverty, where even the rich are poor 8 Precarity, with all goods made fleeting 9 Stratification, where classes do not touch 10 Violence, where life is something cheap 11 Enlightenment, where knowledge is loved 12 Expansion, where things swell greater 13 Hope, that the future should be better 14 Justice, where a reckoning is had 15 Legitimacy, where rulers are by right 16 Pageantry, of splendor and magnificence 17 Prosperity, with wealth easily had 18 Renewal, with things growing brighter 19 Triumph, with victory a fresh memory 20 Unity, where purposes are shared nation •127 Justice: One or more powers or institutions in the nation have a genuine concern for justice and righteous- ness, such that the society’s laws and values are fairly and even-handedly enforced. These laws may not perfectly match modern conceptions of justice, but what exists is meant to be applied evenly. Righteous crusaders for the cause, honest magistrates, and some great struggle to enforce justice on a wide- ly-understood wrong might all be present. Legitimacy: The nation’s rulers or controlling institu- tions have a profound degree of legitimacy among the populace, such that it’s hard to imagine ever overthrowing them as a group. Individuals among them might be criminals or incompetents, but the structures as a whole are accepted as necessary and eternal by most elements of the society. This legit- imacy may derive from divine mandates, personal prowess, honored lineages, or a terror of the chaos that would exist without them. Oppression: Some substantial portion of the nation is cruelly oppressed by some force. It’s rare that this is the same group in all areas of the nation; oppres- sion as a key theme to the setting implies that many groups in many places suffer under this, and it may be accepted as a commonplace that one group or another needs to be harshly repressed if the rest of society is to prosper. Oppressive groups will usually have a clearly-enunciated philosophy of why this state of affairs is necessary, and it usually will have at least some coloring of justification to have per- sisted as it has. Pageantry: The nation is marked by dramatic displays, magnificent architecture, sweeping demonstrations of might, and large-scale undertakings for the glory or edification of the rulers and populace. The locals tend to place great store by such ritual displays, find- ing them inspiring, meaningful, and important in more than strictly material ways. These grandiose efforts actually have real results towards unification, inspiration, and societal harmony. Poverty: The nation is poor. Even aristocrats might not be assured of the necessary staples of life, or basic resources might be constantly threatened by mon- sters, warfare, calamities, or simple dearth. The struggle for resources and the basic necessities for survival are apt to drive numerous conflicts in the setting, and the consequences of failure can be far worse than mere discomfort for the losers. Precarity: Whatever good the nation has is under imme- diate siege by circumstances, and it looks very likely that it might crumble. Something is happening in the setting to make old verities and assured socie- tal institutions totter, whether a massive monstrous invasion or a revolt by some displeased underclass. These institutions will tend to strike out violently at threats, fearing that their basic existence is at stake, and the recklessness of their responses might be the very catalyst that provokes their eventual collapse. Prosperity: The nation is relatively rich, such that con- ventional scourges of famine, privation, and desper- ation aren’t nearly as common as they would be in other cultures. Pockets of genuine want may exist, but the average commoner leads a well-fed, well- clothed life and the grandees have the resources for impressive displays of wealth. This prosperity may be the fruit of unusual natural resources, ex- ceptional societal harmony, magical blessings, or simple good climate. Renewal: A spirit of reformation and renewal breathes through the nation, with old noble houses rising once again, decayed religions being reformed, cor- rupt institutions being shaken, and the populace generally more insistent on improvement. This re- newal could be a harkening back to the old ideals of yore or an appeal to some new innovation, and the subjects could just as easily be a royal house recalled from exile as a new republic’s establishment. Stratification: The nation draws harsh lines between social classes, cultural groups, regions, sexes, or some other distinction between people. Castes and aristocracies are a common feature of these settings, ones drawn sharply by blood or birth circumstances. Adventurers are apt to be wild cards in these societ- ies due to their ability to obtain outsized personal power, and they may regularly run into conflicts or complications that they have the strength to deal with, but not the social permission. Triumph: Something wonderful has recently been accom- plished in the nation; a dark lord defeated, an evil king overthrown, a plague ended, a natural disaster overcome, or the like. The setting is touched with a sense of success and victory, despite the costs of that triumph, and filled with a confidence in its own power and potential. There will be many new insti- tutions and groups seeking to exploit the aftermath and earn their rightful share of the rewards. Unity: Powers and groups within the nation are high- ly united in their goals and sense of fellow-feeling. While not necessarily xenophobic, they will tend to value their brethren more than strangers, and paper over internal conflicts and disagreements that might fester into civil disorder or chaos in less harmonious societies. These societies might have been shaped by some all-consuming peril that forced them together or a culture that greatly prizes unity. Violence: The nation is a bloody one, with human life held cheap and death a commonplace. This may be the result of incessant warfare, such that most people half-expect to die in battle, or it may be the product of a society that simply doesn’t value peo- ple’s lives. Death may be a penalty for comparatively trivial sins, or the environment might just be so dan- gerous that a death in bed is a thing unlooked-for by most.