d20 Significant Terrain Features
1 Ancient farmland. A huge stretch of land
was re-engineered for optimal farming.
2 Arratu wasteland. An area here was
once xenoformed by the Outsiders into
an environment hostile to humanity or one
inhabited by dangerous alien lifeforms.
3 Blasted lands. Radioactive or scorched
over by ancient war. Many ruins are likely.
4 Canyons. A region with extensive canyons
cut by rivers present or long-vanished. Make
sure the rivers don’t climb after leaving them.
5 Dense forest. Trackless, dark, and an
effective natural barrier.
6 Grasslands. A broad sweep of savanna or
grassy plains is a coherent whole here.
7 Islands. There’s a single significant island
off the coast or an archipelago of some note.
8 Jagged mountains. A new or resharpened
mountain range forms a barrier
in the region. The mountains are young, tall,
and likely cast a substantial rain shadow.
9 Jungle. A classic adventure-worthy jungle
of wild, semi-alien flora and fauna.
10 Light forest. Interspersed with other terrain.
11 Megaplex. The ruins of a single huge
ancient structure stretch for endless miles.
12 Pit. A Deep or some other underground
megastructure collapsed and left a hole with
a diameter measured in tens of miles.
13 Rain forest. Vast, damp, and green.
14 Rocky hills. Rough and stony, with little
arable land. Herding and raiding are the
most profitable employments here.
15 Rolling hills. A stretch of gently rolling hills
makes for good agricultural land.
16 Sand desert. This desert is a waste of sand
and dunes. It may be from a rain shadow, or
it might be a legacy of ancient war.
17 Scrub desert. These often appear on the
leeward side of mountain ranges. Borders
will often be grasslands or savanna.
18 Swamp. A sinking river, lake margin, or wet
coastal delta forms a vast bog in this flat land.
19 Volcano. One or more mountains in a
nearby range are volcanically active. This
may be natural or it may be a consequence
of Legacy flux or ancient manipulation.
20 Weathered mountains. A significant skirt
of hills is common. The rain shadow is likely
limited due to the rounded, low mountains.