Battleground: The group’s territory ended up as a battleground
between two stronger rival powers, and
they suffered bitterly for it.
Betrayal: Either they betrayed some trusting neighbor to
a foe, or were betrayed in turn by such a false friend.
Brutal Oppression: Some portion of the group was reduced
to a state of wretched subservience by the rest.
Class Struggle: Different classes were in conflict, either
subtle or overt, all seeking their own gain.
Consequences: Pick an event of a prior age; it had longterm
consequences that were good, for a bad event,
or bad, for a good event.
Decadence: Old strengths and glories crumbled away
into decadent remnants, the group becoming indolent
and indulgent.
Depravity: Vile debauches, unclean habits, and base hungers
became commonplace among the group.
Desolation: Some portion of the group’s territory was
rendered uninhabitable by something, either permanently
or for a long time.
Diplomatic Coup: The group achieved an extremely
successful alliance or affiliation with a neighboring
group that may yet persist.
Economic Boom: Circumstances produced a burst of
tremendous prosperity for them.
Enemies Within: A hostile sub-group inside the group
worked to do it evil, perhaps on behalf of a neighbor
or due to some old grudge.
Evil Wizard: A malevolent sorcerer, arcane cult, or other
powerful magical entity caused a great deal of trouble
for the group.
Exodus: A significant chunk of the group packed up and
left for some supposedly-superior land.
Exquisite Art: The group produced art that is revered to
this day, either in general or in a specific medium
or form of literature.
External War: The group faced a war with some external
enemy or rival nation, with grave consequences.
Freakish Magic: A particular type of magic was developed
here that is unknown elsewhere, and its practitioners
keep its secrets well.
Golden Age: Everything went remarkably well for the
group for an extended period of time, allowing prosperity
and success.
Good Wizard: Some magic-using entity of great power
protected the group, taught them magic, or otherwise
assisted them.
Great Awakening: A tremendous wave of reform, purification,
and re-commitment to venerable values
swept through the group.
Great Builders: The group constructed a great many vast
palaces, monuments, estates, or other structures of
wide fame.
Great Infrastructure: Some tremendous work of infrastructure
was accomplished: canals, vast walls, roads,
aqueducts, mines, or the like.
Hero King: Some king or other ruler achieved legendary
glory in war, diplomacy, or governance. Their name
is honored even today.
Immigrants: A large group of foreigners entered the land
more-or-less peacefully and may or may not have
been welcomed.
Inefficient Rule: The group’s governance was impractical,
inefficient, or corrupt, holding to values that turned
out to be unhelpful.
Internal War: A straight-up civil war was sparked in the
group, one that involved all or many of its members.
Loss of Confidence: Some encounter with a new group
or some shocking event made the group lose faith
in its own customs and values.
Magical Disaster: Some large-scale magical disaster
scarred the group, either natural in nature or the
result of someone’s sorcerous doings.
Magical Tech: The group developed a useful and widespread
magical tech or infrastructure that may have
survived into the present.
Natural Calamity: Earthquakes, multi-year droughts,
tsunamis, meteor strikes, or some other ruins smote
the group.
New Horizons: The group discovered new territory,
whether trans-dimensional, a far terrestrial region,
underground realms, or the like.
New Rulers: The group’s former ruling dynasty was replaced,
either peacefully, through intrigue, or perhaps
through outright conquest.
Noble Function: Aside from the usual roles of nobles,
their ruling class was all expected to fill some specific
role: priest, mage, scholar, or the like.
Noble Strife: The group’s nobility found itself embroiled
in assassinations, petty wars, and mutual struggle.
Plague: A sickness of vast scope culled many of the
group, and may yet linger in some form.
Poverty: Circumstances conspired to reduce the group
to a state of great poverty and harsh simplicity for
a time.
Power Brokers: The group was a critical regional power
broker for a time, their aid or influence critical in
determining who would be the hegemon.
Praetorian Coups: Soldiers or guardsmen in service to
the ruler ended up becoming the ruler’s electors or
deposers.
Priest King: One or more religions became deeply intertwined
with the legitimacy of the ruling class,
priests becoming nobles and vice-versa.
Rare Resource: A uniquely valuable resource was found
or manufactured by the group, which used or traded
it to full effect.
Religious Fall: A once-honored religion collapsed, perhaps
through divine displeasure, human corruption,
or harsh suppression.
Religious Rise: A powerful new religion arose among
the group.
Resource Collapse: Some critical resource ran short;
water, arable land, timber, magical power, or the like.
Secession: A substantial portion of the group’s territory
tried to secede from the rest, successfully or otherwise.
Terrain Change: Some portion of the group’s land slowly
changed its basic ecosystem; plains to forest, desert
to savanna, or the like.
Total Collapse: Whether due to war, civil strife, magical
curses, or sheer decadence, the group’s society collapsed
into anarchistic chaos for a time.
Twist of Fate: Roll again; if the event was positive twist
it to ultimately be a negative to the group, and
vice-versa.
Urbanization: One or more urban sites became unusually
heavily populated, growing vastly and having a
wide net of supporting towns.
Weak Throne: The central government of the group became
weak, and feudal lords or subsidiaries gained
much effective independence.
Xenophilia: The group adopted many customs from their
neighbors and many foreigners joined the group.
Xenophobia: The group conceived a strong distaste for
foreign people and their customs, curtailing outside
contact.